Problem details /2 (#27009)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/web-api/handle-errors.md

## Client error response

An *error result* is defined as a result with an HTTP status code of 400 or higher. For web API controllers, MVC transforms an error result to produce a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ProblemDetails>.

The error response can be configured in one of the following ways:

1. Use the [problem details service](#pds7)
1. [Implement ProblemDetailsFactory](#implement-problemdetailsfactory)
1. [Use ApiBehaviorOptions.ClientErrorMapping](#use-apibehavioroptionsclienterrormapping)

<a name="pds7"></a>

> ### Problem details service

Reviewer: We could mention [Disable ProblemDetails response](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/web-api/?view=aspnetcore-7.0#problem-details-for-error-status-codes-1) that will disable `ProblemDetails` generation for API Controllers, including when calling `WriteAsync` for an API Controller endpoint

> The problem details service implements the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.IProblemDetailsService> interface which supports creating [Problem Details for HTTP APIs](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7807.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problem details service implements the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.IProblemDetailsService> interface, which supports creating [Problem Details for HTTP APIs](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7807.html).
```

* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Diagnostics.ExceptionHandlerMiddleware>: Generates a problem details response when a custom handler is not defined.
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Diagnostics.StatusCodePagesMiddleware>: Generates a problem details response by default.
* [DeveloperExceptionPageMiddleware](#dep7): Generates a problem details response in development when `text/html` is not accepted.

The following code configures the app to generate a problem details response for all HTTP client and server error responses that don't have a body content yet:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_apishort" highlight="4,9":::

Consider the following controller:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Controllers/ValuesController.cs" id="snippet_1":::

> The following code contains the `MathErrorFeature` and `MathErrorType`, which is used with the preceding sample:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following code contains the `MathErrorFeature` and `MathErrorType`, which are used with the preceding sample:
```

* The `/api/values/squareroot` or the `/squareroot` endpoint is called with a radicand less than zero.
* The URI has no matching endpoint.

The problem details response body contains the following when either `squareroot` endpoint is called with a radicand less than zero:

```json
{
  "type": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Square_root",
  "title": "Bad Input",
  "status": 400,
  "detail": "Negative or complex numbers are not allowed."
}
```

#### Generate problem details from Middleware

An alternative approach to using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsOptions> to set <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsOptions.CustomizeProblemDetails> is to set the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsContext.ProblemDetails> in middleware. A problem details response can be written by calling [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.iproblemdetailsservice.writeasync?view=aspnetcore-7.0&preserve-view=true):

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_middleware" highlight="6,19-48":::

> In the preceding code, the minimal API endpoints `/divide` and `/squareroot` return the expected custom problem response on error input. The API controller endpoints return the default problem response on error input, not the custom problem response. The default problem response is returned because the API controller has written to the response stream before [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/ce2db7ea0b161fc5eb35710fca6feeafeeac37bc/src/Http/Http.Extensions/src/ProblemDetailsService.cs#L24) is called. The [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync` source code](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/ce2db7ea0b161fc5eb35710fca6feeafeeac37bc/src/Http/Http.Extensions/src/ProblemDetailsService.cs#L24) shows that if the HTTP response has started, the custom problem details are not written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding code, the minimal API endpoints `/divide` and `/squareroot` return the expected custom problem response on error input. 

The API controller endpoints return the default problem response on error input, not the custom problem response. The default problem response is returned because the API controller has written to the response stream, [Problem details for error status codes](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/web-api/?view=aspnetcore-7.0#problem-details-for-error-status-codes-1), before [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/ce2db7ea0b161fc5eb35710fca6feeafeeac37bc/src/Http/Http.Extensions/src/ProblemDetailsService.cs#L24) is called and the response will not be written again.
```

The preceding `ValuesController` returns <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.BadRequestResult>, which writes to the response stream and therefore prevents the custom problem response from being returned.

The following `Values3Controller` returns [`ControllerBase.Problem`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.controllerbase.problem) so the expected custom problem result is returned:

> :::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Controllers/ValuesController.cs" id="snippet3"  highlight="16-21":::

Reviewer: _**nit:**_ Maybe we could remove the feature lines from this sample:

```diff
-            var errorType = new MathErrorFeature
-            {
-                MathError = MathErrorType.DivisionByZeroError
-            };
-            HttpContext.Features.Set(errorType);
```

* [DeveloperExceptionPageMiddleware](#dep7): Generates a problem details response in development when `text/html` is not accepted.

The following code configures the app to generate a problem details response for all HTTP client and server error responses that ***don't have a body content yet***:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_apishort" highlight="4,8-9,13":::

In the [Generate problem details from Middleware](#gpdm7) section of this article, an example is provided where the response has started and the problem details response is not returned.

Consider the API controller from the previous section, which returns <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpResults.BadRequest> when the input is invalid:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Controllers/ValuesController.cs" id="snippet_1":::

A problem details response is generated with the previous code when any of the following conditions apply:

* An invalid input is supplied.

> * The URI has no matching endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The URI has no matching endpoint.
* An unhandled exception occurs.
```

A problem details response is generated with the previous code when any of the following conditions apply:

* The `/divide` endpoint is called with a zero denominator.
* The `/squareroot` endpoint is called with a radicand less than zero.
* The URI has no matching endpoint.

The problem details response body contains the following when either `squareroot` endpoint is called with a radicand less than zero:

```json
{
  "type": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Square_root",
  "title": "Bad Input",
  "status": 400,
  "detail": "Negative or complex numbers are not allowed."
}
```

<a name="gpdm7"></a>

#### Generate problem details from Middleware

An alternative approach to using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsOptions> to set <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsOptions.CustomizeProblemDetails> is to set the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.ProblemDetailsContext.ProblemDetails> in middleware. A problem details response can be written by calling [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.iproblemdetailsservice.writeasync?view=aspnetcore-7.0&preserve-view=true):

> :::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_middleware" highlight="6,19-48":::

Reviewer: _**nit:**_

```suggestion
:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_middleware" highlight="5,19-40":::
```

The API controller endpoints return the default problem response on error input, not the custom problem response. The default problem response is returned because the API controller has written to the response stream, [Problem details for error status codes](/aspnet/core/web-api/#problem-details-for-error-status-codes-1), before [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/ce2db7ea0b161fc5eb35710fca6feeafeeac37bc/src/Http/Http.Extensions/src/ProblemDetailsService.cs#L24) is called and the response will not be written again.

The preceding `ValuesController` returns <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.BadRequestResult>, which writes to the response stream and therefore prevents the custom problem response from being returned.

The following `Values3Controller` returns [`ControllerBase.Problem`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.controllerbase.problem) so the expected custom problem result is returned:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Controllers/ValuesController.cs" id="snippet3"  highlight="16-21":::

> #### Generate problem details for Minimal API endpoints

Reviewer: _nit:_ Are you planning to add anything here, maybe it is already mentioned before, and it is not needed

The preceding `ValuesController` returns <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.BadRequestResult>, which writes to the response stream and therefore prevents the custom problem response from being returned.

The following `Values3Controller` returns [`ControllerBase.Problem`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.controllerbase.problem) so the expected custom problem result is returned:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Controllers/ValuesController.cs" id="snippet3"  highlight="16-21":::

### Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions

Consider the following app:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/middleware/problem-details-service/Program.cs" id="snippet_apishort" highlight="4,8-9,13":::

In non-development environments, when an exception occurs, the following a standardized [ProblemDetails response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7807) is returned to the client:

```json
{
"type":"https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.6.1",
"title":"An error occurred while processing your request.",
"status":500,"traceId":"00-b644<snip>-00"
}
```

> For most apps, the preceding code is all that is needed as unhandled exceptions are rare.

Author: @brunolins16  can I stay that? All that's needed?

Reviewer: Do you mean the sample code? If yes, the lines that you need to highlight for a non-dev environment are:

``` c#
builder.Services.AddProblemDetails();
```

```c#
app.UseExceptionHandler();
```

Reviewer: I am not sure why exactly, but this statement does not sound good to me `For most apps, the preceding code is all that is needed as unhandled exceptions are rare`. Maybe you could say something like `For most apps, the preceding code is all that is needed, however, if you want to customize [point to the customization topic]`

> An alternative to a [custom exception handler page](xref:fundamentals/error-handling#exception-handler-page) is to provide a lambda to <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ExceptionHandlerExtensions.UseExceptionHandler%2A>. Using a lambda allows access to the error and writing a problem details response with [`IProblemDetailsService.WriteAsync`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.iproblemdetailsservice.writeasync?view=aspnetcore-7.0&preserve-view=true):

Reviewer: What is the strategy for to content duplication?

:::code language="csharp" source="handle-errors/samples/6.x/HandleErrorsSample/Snippets/Program.cs" id="snippet_ClientErrorMapping":::

### Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions

ASP.NET Core doesn't produce a standardized error payload when an unhandled exception occurs. For scenarios where it's desirable to return a standardized [ProblemDetails response](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7807) to the client, the [ProblemDetails middleware](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Hellang.Middleware.ProblemDetails/) can be used to map exceptions and 404 responses to a [ProblemDetails](xref:web-api/handle-errors#pd) payload. The exception handling middleware can also be used to return a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ProblemDetails> payload for unhandled exceptions.

> <!-- TODO UPDATE •	Update Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions to keep mentioning the community middleware as an addition to what we have now.-->

Reviewer: @Rick-Anderson This statement is not true `ASP.NET Core doesn't produce a standardized error payload when an unhandled exception occurs. For scenarios where it's desirable to return a standardized [ProblemDetails response]` anymore. Maybe we can update to say that with the `AddProblemDetails` + middleware (StatusCodeMiddleware and ExceptionHandlerMiddleware) we will produce the ProblemDetails response but they can continue using the [ProblemDetails middleware](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Hellang.Middleware.ProblemDetails/) or configure manually the ExceptionHandler to write the PR. make sense?

> <!-- TODO UPDATE •	Update Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions to keep mentioning the community middleware as an addition to what we have now.-->

Author: @brunolins16  can you take a quick look at [Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions](https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/web-api/handle-errors?view=aspnetcore-7.0&branch=pr-en-us-27009#produce-a-problemdetails-payload-for-exceptions) ?

> <!-- TODO UPDATE •	Update Produce a ProblemDetails payload for exceptions to keep mentioning the community middleware as an addition to what we have now.-->

Reviewer: LGTM. I have feedback about one single statement but other than that it is pretty good.
